---
title: A Treatise Concerning Leg Wounds
---

## and the Foolishness of the Concept of Continuing Combat after Receipt of the Same

*[Don Aubrey de Baudricourt](mailto:Aubrey666@aol.com) and Lord Joachim van den Has*


> *Against studpidity the gods themselves contend in vain.*
>
> --Anacreon, 8th century B.C.

> *At first, all that I could think of was how much it hurt.  Later, after the adrenaline, all that I could think about was how much it hurt.*
>
> --Duellist #1, 24 June, 1997

<B> I. Introduction: In Which is Described the Leg Wound Controversy now being discussed within the rapier community of the SCA and a Disclaimer Concerning the Wisdom of Such Actions as Are Described Later is Presented </B>

> *A combatant receiving such a valid blow to the leg or foot will be considered grounded.  By definition a grounded opponent cannot move from the spot in which he selects to place himself before continuing combat....  A grounded fighter must decide if he will fight from the sitting or kneeling position.*
>
> --Ansteorran Rapier Combat Rules

One of the liveliest and most divisive points of contention now plaguing
the rapier community is the controversy surrounding the actual effects of
wounds to the legs and the proper conduct on the list field once one has
received such a wound.  This seemingly straightforward subject has given
rise to many questions (and a few heated disagreements) that no one person
or event has been able to put to rest.  How much pressure does it take with
a thrust to cause an effective wound?  How effective is a wound to the leg
in a duel and how does such a wound affect the wounded party?   What affect
would the pain and shock of the wound have upon the combatant?   How much at
the mercy of his opponent would the wounded man be in the moments after the
wound?  Would a fighter, struck with such a wound, continue to fight?  Would
he be able to do so?  Would his honor demand that he do so?  Would the honor
of his opponent allow him to do so?  And, finally, just how ridiculous is
the concept of continuing the fight from the ground after receiving such a
wound?

Current convention in the SCA, at least as defined by the Ansteorran rapier
combat rules, is that a thrust or draw cut of sufficient length to the leg
in regular rapier combat causes loss of use of the leg.  By the rules of
most kingdoms in which rapier combat is conducted, the fighter can elect to
continue the combat from a seated or kneeling position.  If he does so, he
is required to remain in such a position, robbed of mobility, and, in
theory, can fight from such a position indefinitely.  Some fighters even
rise to a fully kneeling position at times and at least one is known to have
hopped around from such a position.  In heavy rapier, a tip cut also results
in the same outcome as a thrusting wound to the leg with a standard blade.
As noted in the previous paragraph, some have questioned this policy of
fighting from the ground from the perspective of both pain and honor.  This
paper is being written to address only those points dealing with pain and
the ability to continue on after having portions of a three foot long
sharpened steel implement plunged into your leg or dragged across a part of
your leg or thigh.

Heretofore we have attempted to answer the questions in the first paragraph
based solely upon a great deal of indirect evidence and conjecture.
Descriptive historical accounts, dry anatomy books, experiences of being cut
with household utensils or small bladed weapons that were once prevalent
before the advent of the cheap handgun, theorizing by testosterone-laden
jocks on how much pain they could really take and the opinion of those
trained in the medical field were once all that we had from which to draw
conclusions.  While these sources can provide useful information and insight
in trying to answer questions concerning leg wounds and their effects, these
sources are still indirect and lacking in the personal aspects of
experience.  No words on a page or theories expounded on the side of a list
field can replace actual experience with the real thing.  We now have more
information from which to form an informed opinion.

Thanks to an innovation known as *"Really Duelling with Real Rapiers"*
or *"Virtual Duelling"*, we are now no longer dependent upon the limited
information of the past.  Instead, with the aid of this truly amazing
technological breakthrough in the area of entertainment and sensory
perception, we can now tap directly into the real life experiences of folks
foolish enough to actually fight with real rapiers and live to tell their
tale.  <B><I>(Requried Disclaimer:  The activity described in this paper was
undertaken as a non-SCA related activity and is best left to the criminally
insane.)</I></B> The goal of the duel herein described was to experience the true
feeling of fighting with period weapons (in which it was a success),
preferrably without doing harm to your opponent (in which it failed in a
rather spectacular way).  While such a goal is admirable from a scholarly
point of view, it is fraught with such dangers as should preclude any person
in possession of even a small portion of their faculties from ever
attempting such an undertaking.  The duel of this type that is the central
point of this paper resulted in wounds to each party and, thus, neatly
illustrating our point concerning the lack of sanity involved in such an
experiment.  But, following in the spirit that no experience should be
wasted, the participants have agreed to put their experiences at our
disposal in order to offer important insight into the mechanics of
delivering tip cuts and thrusts to the legs and the advisability or even
possibility of continuing to fight after receiving such a wound.

Despite the jovial tone taken throughout much of this paper, the events
related actually did take place and the participants were very lucky that
nothing more serious took place (i.e. death or permanent maiming or injury).
The writers <B>DO NOT</B> encourage others to emulate the two duellists or their
foolish actions.  This is neither a safe nor intelligent activity and should
not be repeated by anyone (not even by those people that the writers do not
like, no matter how much they may hold the individual in disdain and
contempt). At best, the situation and events herein described  proves that:
1) no experiment is ever a complete failure, it can always be used as a bad
example and 2) evolution has not always tended to enhance the intelligence
of a particular species and, therefore, some elements of the species should
be removed from the gene pool.  Benefit from the experiences of the two
duelling guinea pigs but do not join them.  (Actually, you won't get the
chance to join them as they were heard to say as they hobbled from the
combat area "I'm never doing that again.  Not ever.")  Their friends believe
them.

<B>II.  Wherein are Described the Weapons and Armour used in this Famous
encounter and an accounting of the Duel Itself,  as well as yet another
disclaimer that seeks to separate these Goings-on and others like them from
those of the SCA</B>

> *The word rapier today is ususally taken to refer to a type of sword with a long, narrow, straight blade designed purley for thrusting or, at the most,, only of limited use for cuting.*
>
> --A.V.B. Norman, The Rapier and Small Sword, 1460-1820, 1980

> *But if blowes come from the knees downwardes, they of force must be encountered with the sword, and alwais with the false, or backe edge thereof...& therewithall the enimies legge must be cutt...*
>
> --Di Grassi, His True Arte of Defence, 1594

> *What happened?  I guess that I missed the bloody parry!  Stupid question.*
>
> --Duellist #1, 24 June 1997

The duel in question was fought under the auspices of the North Dallas
Dueling Society, an organization that is dedicated to the recreation of
period combat in period styles and, thusly, is in no way connected to the
SCA nor bound by its laws, customs or traditions, nor does it place any
liability on the SCA for any injuries incurred during its activities.  The
duel was fought as the part of a larger activity involving the demonstration
of Renaissance swordsmanship, scholarship and dance at a local bookstore.
Several participants executed a number of passes using pointed or pointed
and lightly-edged rapiers of modern manufacture and of approximate period
weight, balance and length.  Prior to the last combat, matters had
progressed without difficulty, the fights being conducted at such a range
that even at full extention, no harm could be done.  Considerable control
had been exhibited by all combatants during the early fights.

Both combatants in the duel that has provided the information upon which
this treatise concerning leg wounds and their effects is based were equipped
with pointed but unedged or lightly edged rapiers of 36 inch or greater
length.  The rapier used by Duellist #1 had an elaborately grooved cup hilt
and quillons and terminated in a relatively sharp point but possessed no
edge.  Such a weapon was prevalent in the mid-17th century.  The other
rapier was a swept-hilt weapon possessing loop guards, back guards, side
guards, knuckle bow and quillons of such a type as was used in circa 1575.
The blade terminated in a point and possessed one slightly sharpened front edge.

Duellists #2 was protected by various pieces of body armor, to include a
zigschagge helmet with perforrated steel face, steel gorget, steel back and
breast plate, cup, and a buff coat with pants, shirt, lower thigh-high boots
and leather gloves.  This was standard for a cavalry officer of early- to
mid-17th century Western or Central Europe.  The other participant fought in
doublet, pants, shirt, gloves, cup, and knee-high boots of circa 1640.  Both
had years of experience in sword fighting with lighter unedged and unpointed
weapons and had, from time to time also fought with untipped and pointed
weapons.

The two conducted several passes in which minor "cuts" were inflicted to
the lower shin area by the sliding of the blades across the pant legs or
boots.  These were "called" through the material of the pants or the boots
with little trouble.   These "wounds" were inflicted with the edge of the
weapon and resulted in no damage to material or wound to the body.  In the
fifth pass one duelist inflicted a thrusting "wound" to the other"s gloved
hand that, while not penetrating the leather, was felt through the glove.

The sixth pass saw Duellist #1 inflict an actual wound, fondly called the
Lesser Wound, in the form of a tip cut to the left center of the right thigh
of Duellist #2.  This ragged wound was inflicted exclusively by the tip of
the weapon penetrating to the depth of half an inch and then being dragged
across the surface of the leg after initial penetration of the epidermal
layer.  This type of wound is typical of those now used in heavy rapier and
called incapacitating when inflicted upon an arm or leg and fatal or
debilitating when inflicted upon the body.  Given the lack of effect upon
the recipient of this particular tip cut, it is time to re-evaluate how we
call such wounds and simulate their effects.

The recipient of this particular tip cut later attested that there was
little pain involved, feeling more like the scratch of a cat, the tear by a
thorn or a quick burning sensation than a true wound .  In fact, the wounded
man stated that he did not truly notice it until some time later.  Upon
investigation at that time he determined that he had received a 3 1/2 long
jagged cut of 1/4 to 1/2 inch depth.  It bled copiously but not profusely
and closed quickly.  (Though the next day it became infected, perhaps
reflecting the state of medicine of the time).  It was described as mildly
annoying after the conclusion of the fight.  Needless to say, unfortunately,
the tip cut caused no loss in Duellist #2's ability or will to fight, much
less incapacitation.  The duel continued until the seventh pass, resulting
in the wound upon which this article is truly built.

<B>III. The Greater Wound is described and both the manner in which it was delivered and received and Its Effects are detailed for the reader</B>

> *Provided that no arteries or tendons are severed and the muscle and bone remain intact, the human body is capable of taking severed lacerations and still keep going.  This is apperently not the case with internal puncture wounds...*
>
> ---John Clements, Renaissance Swordsmanship, 1997

> *They're not really supposed to stick each other like that, are they?*
>
> --Obnoxious Red Bearded Man, June 24, 1997

On the seventh pass the two combatants became locked  corps-a-corps in a
lower parry to the right of Duellist #2 that bound both blades.  Duellist #2
then pivoted to an off-line position off his lead foot and his opponent
followed suit with his lead leg.  In doing so Duellist #1 impaled his right
leg upon his opponent's point to the depth of about two centimeters at a
point an inch above and to the right of the knee.  This brought the fight to
a complete stop for reasons that shall be explained shortly.

To Duellist #2, the sensation of the blow as felt through the hilt of the
rapier was little more than what would be registered with a good schlager
strike or, more accurately, a slap with the weapon.  This was, in part,  due
to the fact that he was not in the process of delivering a blow but, rather,
that his opponent ran up upon the blade.  In fact, the "wounding" party was
unaware that anything more than a solid thump to the leg with the flat of
the blade had been delivered until his opponent fell to the ground, which
took place almost immediately.  For the next four to six seconds, according
to Duellist #1, he was completely at the mercy of Duellist #2 due to the
sheer shock effect of the wound. Duellist #2 did notice a disorientation and
state of confusion about Duellist #1's behavior at this time in that
Duellist #1 did not respond to verbal instructions to move his hand from the
wound so that it might be inspected.

But the effect of the wound upon Duellist #1, who has had previous
expeience with wounds by bladed weapons (but not of this type) was telling.
The leg folded beneath him immediately, forcing him to a seated position.
So far this tracks with what is commonly done in SCA rapier and heavy rapier
combat when one takes a leg wound.  But by his own account, Duellist #1 was
in absolutely no mood to continue fighting, adrenaline or no adrenaline.  A
combination of shock, surprise and pain left him defenseless for a
considerable period of time, as noted above.  Once recovered from that,
however, the wounded duellist attested to the fact that the pain was such
that he would not have been able to mount any kind of coherent defense,
despite the fact that he was then "wired" with adrenaline.

Duellist #1, unable to place weight upon the leg at all, was quickly taken
to a back room where the wound was inspected and first aid performed by
Deullist #2 and members of the supporting cast.  It was at this time that
Duellist #2 noticed that his wound had left a bloody patch and, as time
permitted, he examined his wound as well.  The thrust wound itself was
relatively superficial.  "D" shaped and two centimeters deep, it had missed
any veins or arteries and did not cause appreciable muscle or tendon damage,
being located in the area between the lower tibialis anterior and lower
extensor hallucis longus.  It bled very little (in fact, less than did the
tip cut inflicted in the earlier pass), filling with blood but never
bleeding  beyond that point.   All in all, while spectacular in appearance,
it was little more than a flesh wound.

In an interview enroute to medical treatment Duellist #1 rated the pain of
the wound as a "5" on a sliding scale of 1 to 10.  In describing the
experience he said that he could actually feel both the impact and the force
of the weapon as it slid into the leg.  His estimation of the depth of the
wound, judged by these sensations, was amazingly accurate.  There were no
other sensations relating to the wound (i.e. dizziness or light-headedness)
once the initial shock wore off.   He also had lost the ability to bend or
otherwise manipulate the central region of the leg, though he could move the
toes and pivot the foot on the ankle.

Once at the clinic, after the rather sticky task of describing the accident
and explaining our novel form of dress, the medical staff quickly cleansed
and dressed the Greater Wound.  The physician confirmed that the blade had
missed striking anything of note and that the wound would heal in about a
week. The Greater Wound required six stitches and Duellist #1 was up and
about the next day, albeit with the use of a cane and was fighting again
within two weeks.


<B>IV.  Conclusion:  Wherein is Stated:  "Boys and girls, don't do this at
home.  We are trained professionals... and even we didn't get it right."</B>

> *I have always thought that fighting from  the ground after getting "legged" is rather stupid.*
>
> --Duellist #2, 25 June, 1997

> *I see your point.  The next time that I see someone fighting from the ground I will tell them just how clueless they are.*
>
> --Duellist #1, 25 June, 1997

> *I can't believe that you two were stupid enough to do that.  No, wait a minute.  Yes, I actually can believe it.*
>
> --Duellist #2's Girlfirend, 25 June 1997

What conclusions can be reached from the folly of our two friends?  A
number of lessons have sprung from this experience, not the least of which
was a resolve by the participants to never embark upon such a foolish course
of action again.  The two duellists, hooted at, mocked and laughed at by
their friends and much embarrassed, have stated to the authors an
unwillingness to restage the fight so that a larger party of observers might
be present and benefit from the experience..  "No, this is a party that is
not coming to an Academy or Queen's near you!"

From a more practical point of view in regards to rapier combat, the
experience has much value to offer.  As the only documented duel with actual
rapiers, at least in Ansteorra (we are normally smarter than this; see
disclaimers earlier in this paper) that has resulted in documented wounds,
this situation offers several valuable pearls of knowledge.

First, both duelists were more than a little amazed at the lack of force or
pressure that it took to penetrate with the sword into the flesh and cause a
disabling wound.   Seeing the Machine is one thing.  Stabbing and tip
cutting an actual person is quite another.  Neither the tip cut nor the
puncture seemed to require more force than that required for a decent epee
or heavy rapier shot in SCA combat.  Clothing offered absolutely no
protection from the rapier points, being penetrated probably more easily
than was the skin, though of course the metal armor and, to a lesser extent,
the buff coat provided some real protection.  The tip cut left nothing more
than a small hole in the pants, rather than a long slash, and the thrust
only opened the material a few threads wider than the wound itself.  Running
onto the blade, with even a little force, appears to be sufficient to cause
a mildly disabling wound.  Had Duellist #2 been in the process of delivering
a thrust when Duellist #1 stepped onto his blade, the rapier would most
likely have completely transfixed the leg and done serious damage.  Upon
reflection, Duellist #2 believes that the "thump" he felt through the hilt
of the weapon was his point impacting on one of the leg bones of Duellist
#1, such was the lack of resistance the blade met and the ease with which it
penetrated.

Secondly, the concept of two fighters being in complete control of a fight,
no matter their experience level, needs to be revisited.  Both duellists had
shown remarkable control during previous duels that evening and, yet, the
duel ended with injuries.  Two individuals who are in complete control over
their own blades are still not necessarily in control of the fight.  Both
duellists knew exactly where they were, where their opponents were and where
their own blades were and were careful to keep the points away from the
opponent.  But neither could control the movements of the other and, these
being very quick, were unable to compensate in time for this
unpredictability.  In the case of the first wound, the tip cut, the wounded
individual moved onto the point ever so slightly.  This made what would have
been a flick of the point delivered onto the cloth a rent into the flesh.
The thrusting wound was also moved into by the wounded party.  The moral of
the story from this angle seems to be that no one truly controls the fight.

Thirdly, the disparity in the effects of the wounds was also suprising.
True, the puncture wound was three times as deep as the tip cut.  But it was
far more than three times as effective.  The tip cut did not deter the
wounded fighter one whit in continuing the fight while the thrust to the leg
terminated the fight by incapacitating the wounded duelist.  It would seem
that punctures are significantly more effective than tip cuts.  One could
even argue that tip cuts have little effect except when delivered to the
face, eyes or forehead.  For a tip cut to be deep enough to have any true
effect it would have to penetrate deeply enough that it becomes a puncture.
This may require a review of the rules in regards to tip cuts and other
related types of wounds as they pertain to heavy rapier or at least the way
that we call them and acknowedge the effects of such wounds..

But the most important finding concerning this ghastly little experiment
dealt with the pain of a thrust to the leg and its sapping of one's will and
ability to continue fighting.  An admittedly shallow puncture wound that
touched no vital areas and caused no significant permanent muscle or tendon
damage rendered a fighter completely defenseless for a matter of at least
five seconds (more than enough time for his opponent to finish him) and both
unwilling and unable to continue the contest once the shock had worn off.
This was in spite of the rush of adrenaline that the wounded individual
admitted was coursing through his system within seconds of the wound.  The
pain of the wound was not lessened in any way by a change from a standing to
a sitting or to a prone position.  The pain was ever present and it
terminated the fight.

With all of this in mind, should we not review the rules governing leg
wounds and the continuing of a fight once one has been so wounded?  Putting
all matters of honor and properness aside for the moment, does not the sheer
physical inability of a young fighter of considerable skill, endurance and
experience to continue fighting after receiving a relatively minor leg wound
call into question the entire concept of continuing to fight under such
circumstances on the field?  The answers to both questions are the same:
yes.  It can be argued that this is but one piece of data.  That is true.
But it is a very important and relevant piece of data unlike any gathered
before.  It is time to consider treating these wounds in a more realistic
manner and move away from a practice that seems now, in the light of this
dearly bought experience, to be little more than a way for someone at a
disadvantage to continue fighting with hopes to gain that all -mportant win.
It is time to eschew such practices and move towards a more realistic
portrayal of the results of what we do.

The End

### The Cast

* Duellist #1: Unnamed Idiot
* Duellist #2: Complete A. Utter Fool
* Duellist #3: Unwounded Fuzzy-Headed Man
* Duellist #4: Unwounded Woman/Boy
* Clinic Receptionist: Barbara Smith
* Nurse: Herself
* Doctor: Dr. Harry "Lightneedle" Lee
* Store Manager: Herself
* Duellist #1's Girlfriend: Wisely Anonymous
* Duellist #2's Girlfriend: Too Smart to Be There
* Obnoxious Red-Bearded Man: Himself
* Director: Ernesto Maldonado
* Producer: North Dallas Dueling Society
* Special Effects: Wounds-Are-Us, Inc.
* Costuming: Joe Rummel, Neil Santos, Francis Lucas, Don Sims & Ernesto Maldonado

This paper was shot on location in North Dallas, Richardson and at the A.M./P.M. Clinic.

Any resemblence between the events and people described herein and any real personage or event is purely truthful.

No real cadets were harmed in the making of this paper.
