---
title: Light Weapons Is Not A Light Sport
---

*Author's note:* This article is a catharsis to vent some frustration.
It is not intended to discourage anyone from learning light weapons, but
to highlight some of the realities in trying to master this art.

As an instructor for the past four years in light weapons, I have met
many people who wish to learn this art.  I have met many more who wish
to dabble.  It is easy to tell the difference.  In this time I have
given anyone who has expressed an interest to pick up a foil as much
time as I have been able, often at the expense of my own training.  As
an instructor, I do not expect all or even most of my students to be in
top physical condition.  (ie. I freely admit I could stand to lose about
20 pounds.)  However, I do expect a serious student to be in reasonable
shape or be willing to get into shape.  (Please note:  I do not use the
term overweight, as I know a 300 pound Don in Ansteorra who is capable
of teleporting, and its scary when he does it.)

Light weapons is not a sport which will make you physically fit.  The
muscle groups that it uses are specific and used only in brief bursts.
In general, light weapons is not physically demanding, but it requires
you be able to move fluidly.  A physical fitness program in addition to
fighting is essential to developing any sort of proficiency.

The point of this missive is that if you are badly out of condition; or
just wish to dabble with it at the weekend fighter practice, please
reconsider.  If you are unwilling to include some kind of additional
exercise, or even to practice the movements at home, please don't waste
my time.  I don't wish to sound conceited, but I have only so much time
for practice.  What time I do have available, I want to teach students,
and improve my own skills.  To become skilled enough to even authorize
requires practice at home as well as at fighter practice.  If you are
not serious enough to devote an extra hour or two a week to learning
this art, then please don't expect me to be serious about teaching you.

In closing let me reiterate, light weapons is not a power muscle sport,
but it requires that your muscles be in condition to handle the bursts
of movement make up this sport.  In this sense, you are in far more
danger of strains and pulled muscles than in heavy weapons.  Finally, no
matter what shape you are in, if you are willing to make a genuine
commitment to learn the art, then I will make the commitment to you to
teach it.

Lord Kirk Dragomani<BR>
Provost, Ad'E
