---
title: Why Do We Calibrate?
--- 

There is often a misunderstanding as to why light weapons fighters need
to calibrate before each match.  The purpose is not to show your
opponent what you consider a "killing" blow.  A killing blow is
officially defined as a 2" bend in a standard #5 foil blade.  This has
been documented by far more competent souls than I as the force required
to penetrate the human body.  The real purpose is for each fighter to
feel their opponent's weapon when it has a 2" bend delivered at speed.

Foil blades vary in strength depending on the manufacturer and the age
of the blade.  Calibrating gives you the feel of your opponent's blade.
If your opponent's blade is weak, you now know to call the blows
lighter.  On the other hand, because of the amount of armor we wear, if
you know you have a weak blade, consider retiring it.  Yes, you can
deliver a killing blow with a blade that has all the spring of a wet
noodle, but don't get too upset if people don't call your shots because
they can't feel them.  HOWEVER, this is no excuse to ignore a shot
because it felt light when you know your opponent has a weak blade.  

I have also heard, "You'll have to hit harder, my armor is thick
there." I quote from the Rapier Combat Rules:  "Any protection or
article of clothing that prevents a fighter from properly calling a blow
will not be allowed."  If you are wearing so many layers of cloth or
leather you cannot feel a blow, Then give serious thought to upgrading
your armor to a better material and fewer layers.  In swashing, rhino
hides are far more visible than in heavy weapons. Everyone can see that
blade bend.

When you calibrate, a short thrust to the chest, arm, and mask are
usually sufficient. A draw cut to the neck or the underside of the arm
(where the brachial artery is) is good practice.  The thrusts should be
quick, delivered at speed, and give a 2" bend.  When your opponent
strikes you, concentrate on how it feels, and remember how strong their
blade is.  Proper calling of blows is always difficult, they will make
or ruin a reputation quicker than anything else, so this is why we
calibrate.

Lord Kirk Dragomani<BR>
Provost, Ad'E
