---
title: Free Scholar's Oath
---

Henceforth, you will hold to these conditions of our Order, which have been made known to you here, in the presence of your fellow Free Scholars.

You shall be a loyal subject to our Sovereigns, King ________ and Queen _______, Monarchs of Atlantia, and to their successors. You will serve them and theirs against all nations to the best of your ability.

You shall be a true Free Scholar, teaching others to uphold our traditions, to love truth and knowledge, and to hate falsehood and ignorance, as you and other Free Scholars do. You shall teach only those who have proven themselves worthy of the responsibility that comes with this knowledge; as such, you shall not teach any suspect person, as a murderer, a thief, a common drunkard, or those who be common quarrelers.

When called upon to render judgment on any prize, game, or bout, you shall promptly speak the truth of what you have witnessed as it appears to you, setting aside all bias.

You shall always be merciful to any who are true subjects of Atlantia, and should you have the upper hand over them, you shall not kill them should you be able to preserve yourself without further bloodshed.

You shall keep this Free Scholar's Oath in all things declared unto you in the presence of your brethren of this Academie, on your sacred honor.

## Ancient (original) Version

Imprimis, you shall uphold, maintain and keep to your power all such
articles as shall be declared unto you here in the presence of these your
fellow Free Scholars.

You shall be loyal subject to our Sovereigns, King ____ and Queen ____, and
their successors, monarchs of this Realm of Atlantia, and not to know of
any treason but that you utter it within four and twenty hours at the
farthest and sooner if you can, and to serve them and theirs against all
nations to the uttermost of your power.

You shall be a true Free Scholar from this day unto the last of your life,
to love and serve the truth and hate falsehood, as other Free Scholars
have done heretofore, according to the ancient orders of our science.  You
shall not teach any suspect person, as a murderer, a thief, a common
drunkard, or such as be common quarrelers, but to avoid your hands of them
and keep no company with them, so nigh as you can. You shall not teach any
person, whatsoever he or they be, without you do assure yourself that they
will uphold the ideals and tenets of this Academie.

That any prize or game where you shall be, either to sticle or stand by,
you shall say the truth of that which you shall see when you be asked or
called to speak.  And when you shall be so asked or demanded, you shall
give true judgement of that which you shall have seen, so nigh as you can,
setting all affections apart, and rightly to judge without fraud or guile,
even as you would be judged.

You shall always be merciful, and whereas it may happen that you have the
upper hand of your enemy, that is to say, under your feet, or without
weapon, or some other advantage, you shall not kill him, if he be a true
subject of Atlantia, saving yourself without danger of death or bodily hurt
according to your first oath which you received entering to learn this
science.

You shall keep or cause to be kept, our orders, rules, and conventions in
all prizes, as we have declared unto you.

You shall keep this Free Scholar's oath in all points now given and
declared unto you in the presence of these your brethren of this Academie,
on your sacred honor.
